I'm Wesley Morris and this is Cannonball
today. Put your paws up.
Listen, it's a dark time in this country
right now and weirdly also a dark time
in pop and maybe even for Taylor Swift.
>> I would say that you're right about
that, too.
>> That's a different conversation. We'll
get to it. It'll probably come on the
show. But seriously, darkness, you know,
death and blood, skull, bones, a sharp
knife, sharp teeth, and like right now
in pop music, it's all Carrie and Pig's
blood is Glattus from weapons. Sharp
rone. She likes these gothic baby doll
killer getups. And how many times, I
mean, I at least have seen live in
concert Charlie X do this thing where
she spits and then licks her spit back
up during a set. Doicat just went on SNL
and the vibe was real Beetlejuice horror
picture show. Even Sabrina Carpenter,
who is not somebody I associate with
this moment of dark pop or dark costumed
pop, I have seen her with the occasional
severed limb. But you know whose
children these little monsters are?
They're Lady Gaga. The woman perfected
the performance of Dark Weirdo. And for
me, the genius of her is that she
figured out a way to take the entire
life cycle of a pop star and compress it
into about four or five years. But the
question for me was what happens at year
six, year seven. It's been 17 years now.
And there are a lot of ideas there and
they haven't always cohered for me. And
I'm seeing all these other pop stars
running around with her ideas and I'm
thinking, what does she have? Has she
been overtaken, usurped? Like earlier
this year, she released this album,
Mayhem. I thought it was like hearing
the equivalent of a movie star walking
around a mall hoping somebody recognizes
her. What am I supposed to do with this?
But then my pal Karen Gans, who's the
pop music editor here at the times, she
told me that something special was going
on with Mayhem the tour. I just I tend
to do what Karen says. So, we went
together to see the final night of the
Mayhem ball at MSG last month. That's
Madison Square Garden. And I'm still
thinking about it. I mean, this is the
season to be talking about Lady Gaga,
who fashions herself Mother Monster. And
as usual with Karen, that's C A R Y N.
Y'all, she was right. Something special
is kind of going on with this show. so
special that Lady Gaga announced another
US leg of the tour for 2026. And right
now as I talk, she's doing this thing
somewhere in Europe. So, we're gonna
talk about it. Here's my conversation
with Karen.
Karen, welcome to Cannonball. Thank you,
Wesley. I love being told I'm right.
>> First of all, I got to just get
something out of the way immediately. We
saw this show. I ever since we saw it
have just got songs in my brain. Like
Lady Gaga, I don't know what's in her
stuff musical logically, but there are a
few artists where you just cannot
escape the songs. They're not earworms.
They're like anacondas.
They just live in here and they just
sort of sloop around for days and days
and days and days. Right now I've got uh
Alejandro
>> on the brain and it is it is it is
driving me nuts.
>> Alejandro.
>> You know how I feel about Alejandro. I
think this is one of one of the best
songs ever written. I get chills
listening to Alejandro. Oh yeah.
>> Like legitimately on the subway here.
>> And my gripe is that she did one verse
and one chorus of it at the show.
>> Alejandro deserves like a two-hour
concert. I could listen to Alejandro on
on repeat,
>> but you know, we saw this show together
cuz you made me go
>> or you lured me to going. You didn't
force me to do it. I I was curious
because, you know, our our pop music
critic, Lindsay Zolads,
>> wrote this wonderful review of this show
and I was kind of like, I'm going to go
>> and No, what I said was, should I go?
>> Yes. And I said, I'll buy tickets for
the last night. We're going
>> just to sort of like set a stage for our
relationship to this artist. What's
yours? Cuz it's been 17 years. Karen,
what is uh what's going on with the two
of you?
>> Okay, so very early. I was at Rolling
Stone when she first came out and her
publicist was this amazing woman named
Jenny Body. She's a legend. She was
nervous publicist. She said, "I have a
new artist. Her name is Lady Gaga. Come
see her at Splash."
>> And I was like,
>> "Oh, it's at Splash. Splash. That's how
early.
>> RIP.
>> Man, New York has not been the same
since that place closed.
>> No.
>> Had a lot of good times at Splash, let
me tell you.
>> But I did not go because I said, "Lady
Gaga
at Splash." No. Well, huge regret.
>> Did you think it was a drag artist?
>> I don't know. I just thought like it
sounded fluffy.
>> Okay.
>> Anyway, The Fame comes out. Wonderful
first album, but then, you know, and I'm
into all the super poppy dance songs.
You know, you've got your poker face,
your Just Dance. She then goes and she
makes an EP, The Fame Monster, which has
three of the best songs ever compiled in
pop history in the same breath of each
other. Bad Romance, Alejandro, and
Telephone.
>> Mhm. That's got one of my favorite Gaga
songs on it.
>> Which one?
>> Teeth.
>> Oh, I know you love that song.
>> Yeah, I'll get to
>> That's for you. Okay, so keeping it
moving. I became obsessed with her. I
thought Bad Romance is like one of the
best modern pop songs ever, but I also
was very obsessed about her relationship
with Madonna. How much was borrowing?
How much was homage? How much was
stealing?
>> So, this was I'm a very big Madonna fan.
You know this. Now, your listeners know
this. So, I think I think people did
know this. So, obsessed. Then, Born This
Way arrives and I'm not crazy about the
song Born This Way. I'm not crazy about
the song Judas. But the whole album
comes and I'm like, "Oh my god, this is
like a crazy arena rock album.
>> It's lunatic. It is absolutely out of
its mind." It has a song produced by Mut
Lang with a guitar solo by Brian May,
which we will talk about.
>> It is brilliant. And I became just like
completely seduced by its like I I
couldn't tell if it was serious. I
couldn't tell if it was glam. It was I
mean it's just there some of the best
pop songwriting there.
>> So I reviewed that album. I ended up
loving it. Then comes Art Pop.
>> Go on.
>> Oh Karen,
>> so much to say. I reviewed Art Pop.
>> Yes,
>> I liked some of our pop. It does not
sound great today to me. She was trying
to show that she had a relationship to
high art that I think that she had
inherently without having to to
demonstrate it the way she did on that
album.
>> So, she loses me a little bit. Then she
puts out an album called Joanne. She
loses me a little bit more, which is
sort of like a authentic album.
>> That's the like stripped down this is
who I really am. One of my middle names
is Joan.
>> I'm going to pull from my life. I'm
going to tell you something meaningful
about me.
>> Okay. I'm It's a little too much
discography here. I'm just going to say
my relationship to her began on an
extreme high. It started to slip. It
slipped a little bit more. We get to
Chromatica and I was like, ah, I don't
know how I feel about this. People are
calling this a return to form album and
I feel terrible. You just asked about my
relationship with her. I'm just going
relationship though.
>> The point the point is actually it's a
roller coaster. I've been up and down
for a long time. But I've always
believed in Lady Gaga that there is the
kernel of an absolutely brilliant pop
icon inside there. Because to me, pop
star doesn't just mean
>> songwriter. It doesn't just mean
performer. It's like world building.
It's spectacle. It's understanding of
all of the relationship with the theater
of it with the character. The person has
to be interesting. They have to have the
musical chops. There's just so much that
goes into it, right? There aren't that
many of them. But I always wanted to
believe that she still had it and that
like the truth of this was going to come
back.
>> Okay.
>> You know, that was actually pretty
succinct. Honestly,
>> I I had to stop myself.
>> Um because, you know, and your journey
mirrors mine in a lot of ways. I didn't
I wasn't reviewing the albums the way
you were, but I think that she was kind
of a performance artist in a lot of
ways. She was somebody who was
satarized. She appeared to be satarizing
fame while also being interested enough
in it. And she came at this really
interesting moment in 2008 and 2009
where
our relationship to fame was changing
because technology was allowing it to
change
>> or encouraging it to change. You know,
this is the beginning of the iPhone,
Facebook, the Kardashians,
and here was this person who was kind of
making fun of this of this fame hunger
that the country was was experiencing
>> and sort of fetishizing it at the same
time.
>> Yes. But that part doesn't well the
fetish it's funny because in order to
complete the performance Gaga seemed to
be taking this risk that in or walking
this this tight rope where in order to
satarize the celebrity experience I must
become a famous person myself.
>> And the thing I found scary about that
was how much she meant it. Right.
>> She commits to every bit.
>> She was she was extremely committed. She
would wear, you know, I mean the famous
the famous iconographies from this
period. She wears some carpacio to the
VMAs.
>> Yes.
>> And you know, she really is someone who
understands the power, you know, much
like Madonna of
its
appearance, right? like what it means to
be seen, the power of the spectacle, the
what you should do when millions of eyes
are upon you. It was kind of like a
mockery of what made Madonna great.
>> You know, this is a student. Madonna is
a teacher. Gaga is a student. She's
learned a lesson. The lesson is, well,
what would it mean to just kind of like
not take any of this seriously, you
know? Oh, well, I'm I'm going to the
show. are all these cameras and
reporters and microphones. I'm going to
literalize this by just wearing actual
meat. Y'all want Y'all want a steak?
Y'all want to eat me alive? Well, here.
Have some Carpacio.
>> I found that funny a little scary
because what else would she do?
>> Arrive in a gigantic egg
>> that she claimed she had been in for a
week prior.
But think about like this was a great
moment for pop music also because she
was at a she was at a vanguard for young
new at the time artists, right? This is
she was doing something different from
Katy Perry, Kesha, Rihanna, you know,
Adele. And I was really curious to see
where this fame satire project was going
to go.
>> But I guess the question is like what
happened, right? because the message got
scrambled, but it's all in the surface
of this, you know, halflife of a pop
star.
>> By the time she gets to these duets with
Tony Bennett in 2014,
I was like a tip of the hat to you, Miss
Gaga, because you have officially
lived
four decades of a career in eight.
>> Yep. It's not so much that the work
itself was a joke as much as it was
she's managed to achieve something where
by age what like 32 she's 80 years old
>> right she's a good thing she's working
with a legend one of the greatest voices
in in the in recorded sound Tony Bennett
but the question was after that
collaboration where does this project go
is there a new project are there new
ideas
>> and I think the thing that sort of
turned you off or at least I'm gonna
speak for you, confused you,
>> turned me off
>> was that it didn't seem there didn't
there didn't seem to be a story Yeah.
>> that was as compelling or interesting or
as fascinating as what had been going on
for those first eight years.
>> It felt like she was trying to do a
redo.
>> Like that was me being frothy,
>> pop star, whatever. But the real music
and the true authenticity comes from my
jazz work and from these stripped down
songs that I'm writing which is sort of
the plot of A Star is Born.
>> Yes.
>> Which made me insane.
>> It is about the border between the
authentic and the inauthentic.
>> Yeah. And I what I love about even the
problems that you and I have with
keeping the story straight with where it
is she's trying to go and who it is she
wants to be is that there are always
these dualities.
>> Right? She is artificial. Is she
authentic? Is the artifice authentic or
can the
authenticity be artificial?
>> Yeah. But there's also this tension
between not wanting it and wanting it,
right? Between hunger and and
indifference.
And she began, you know, her career
playing with not wanting the thing that
she claimed she that, you know, that the
that the persona wanted, being offered
up as meat, right? But also
understanding that like there was
something hot in the tension.
>> I mean, but here's the thing. You don't
really become a pop star by accident.
This is like the work of exceptional
struggle.
>> Mhm.
>> And you know, it's sort of like, oh my
god, she found herself so famous. Did
she really want it? Yes. The answer is
yes. I mean, she wanted it. The first
album was called The Fame.
>> And it's more to me, it's more
aspirational than critical.
>> You mean the as an album?
>> As a concept.
>> Oh, I see. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes.
>> Um, you know, a lot of people write
about fame early. I mean, she literally
called the whole album fame and then a
year later it's the fame monster, right?
So, it's like you got a taste of it, but
obviously she still wanted more. I mean,
she's one of the hardest working people
in in pop, in show business,
>> and you can see that in the show. I
mean, let's just talk about the show
then because I think that the you know,
neither of us is crazy about Mayhem as
an album.
>> I was not completely sold on Mayhem the
album.
>> Yeah.
>> But I am beyond sold on Mayhem the tour.
>> Okay.
>> It's growing on me because the show is
that successful.
>> Yes. Talk to me about going the first
time knowing how you felt about the
album.
>> I was open-minded, I want to say. You
know, I've seen Gaga a lot over the
years, and it's like you cannot deny the
voice. I mean, she's she has an
absolutely incredible voice, but I have
seen her be in different forms on stage
and I've never seen the version that
like completely clicked where everything
was happening right for me. Like I was
the first tour I was like, "These sets
look really cheap or like I don't know.
It just feels like underdeveloped."
There's a lot of plot in some of these
shows and I'm like, "There's too much
plot." I just I'd never seen the whole
thing connect and that is a complete
difference. When you walk into Mayhem,
you are immediately sort of wrapped into
this world. It's very gothic
>> uh and dark and interesting. The set is
sort of like how would you describe it?
>> I mean, you know, it's funny cuz if you
like what I would say to set up what
what is going on with mayhem is like if
you cut this woman, she would bleed
Madonna.
>> Yeah.
>> David Bowie.
>> Yes.
>> Freddy Mercury.
>> Michael Jackson.
>> Whitney Houston. Michael Jackson,
Christina Aguilera, and Andrew Lloyd
Weber.
>> Yes. Okay. So, that's pretty much what
it looks like.
>> The stage of this thing is it's like
you're looking at like a Gothic castle.
Yeah.
>> Right.
>> But I also think that if you cut this
show, it would bleed Tim Burton, Dallas,
and Wonderland.
>> Yes.
>> I think we got to set the scene.
or or recreate for ourselves what that
night was like.
>> We had we had a little light trauma with
the start time.
>> Um what time was it supposed to start?
>> So she has been going on very precisely
at 8:30.
>> Why did she not go on the night we went?
>> Because unbeknownst to us but perhaps
known to others in the arena it seemed
she actually went to the VMAs. The VMAs
were that night at UBS Arena on Long
Island. So, she was dressed for an award
show, went to an award show, accepted an
award for artists of the year.
>> Getting ready for the show, I thought
how much it would mean to me to win this
award tonight. And I cannot begin to
tell you what this means to me.
>> Then had to come back, get out of
whatever that was she was wearing was a
giant black gothic kind of thing, and
into her show clothes. I wish I could
stay and watch all these amazing
performances, but I have to go back to
Madison Square Garden. Let me
>> Well, we didn't know this was happening.
There are people in the suits. They had
TVs and they were watching the show.
>> Yes. So, I didn't know this until the
next day and I'm the idiot sitting there
being like, I have no idea why she's so
late. What's going on? It was I mean,
this was Madonna-esque. You know, she
very regularly goes on late and I was
like, this isn't like you, Gaga. M and
and lo and behold, it was not. She was
being fetted.
>> You know, actually, I'll allow it.
>> I'll allow it, too.
>> Yeah. Cuz anyway, you asked what I
thought when I walked in. I walked in, I
saw the set. I was like, "This is going
to be interesting."
>> But the thing that absolutely
crystallized it was the arrival. I am
very interested in pop stars arrival.
How they arrive on stage. Do they pop up
from the floor? Do they come out from
behind? Are they flying in, you know, on
a
>> Mariah has flown in on a sleigh?
>> I believe
>> I remember.
>> Yes.
The curtains open and Lady Gaga comes on
this absolutely massive I want to say
like twotory tall setpiece and it is a
giant red dress.
>> It's a toughet. I would describe it as a
giant red toughet dress
>> and she is a top it and it is slowly
enormous into the arena as operetic
music is playing and everybody is
sourcing around her and it's just like
you did it. I mean it is the height of
drag. It is so I mean Rupaul always says
that but like it's so stupid and it's
she is absolutely genius. I knew from
that minute I was like oh my god she's
she's done it.
>> Wait but Karen this is never there's
never been an image like this in any
previous Gaga show.
>> Not like that. No chromatica was very
cold and antiseptic and sort of
architectural. I just it all really came
together when she came out on this
thing. Wesley I really almost cried. I
could not believe it.
Um, now I'm going to be present with you
at the show because you know there's a
plot which is basically two queens
occupy the same chessboard only one can
win. The queen of course being the most
powerful person or or piece on the
chessboard.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
>> I was like an art semiotics major. I
cannot follow the plot of any of these
things that she does. I was like what is
happening?
>> But this one has a kind of coherence to
me. I mean, it does
>> because it's about a it's another one of
these duality battles and I think that
there I think there are more than two
selves in this person, but I love that
she edited it down to two. This tough
comes out is the first song
>> she does bloody Mary.
>> Okay. I'm like, well, what is what is
this doing? They've they've wheeled it
out, but then this curtain around the
the cake tuffet, it parts. And inside
this MF is basically a corset. It's a
corset.
>> It's a cage.
>> And in the corset are trapped her
dancers.
>> There there are seven dancers trapped
inside the dress.
>> In a corset. I mean, listen, Camille
Palia couldn't have done it better. She
couldn't have done it better. like
Glorious Dynam.
>> Yep.
>> It's I mean Simone de Bavar take that.
>> No, it's absolutely incredible image.
And then they go into abracadabra which
is like you know one a great song for
the new album.
>> Yes.
>> And she staggers out of her own corset
and an elevator. By the way, there's an
elevator in the tuffet corset cake
velvet red velvet thing.
>> So, she descends and then emerges. She
bursts through the cage with her cane
and she does some staggery cane
choreography, tosses it off stage,
carries on, and then returns to do one
of what I have always I've never really
liked this song because it is just so
>> it didn't connect to me. It was purely
chaotic, but it's Judas, which for some
reason works when you're dancing with a
giant cake dress. I don't know. And then
she goes straight into shisa.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> Which is one of my absolute favorite
Lady Gaga moments of all time. She
literally is speaking fake German. It's
not real, which we didn't know at the
time. And then she is writing with her
giant feathery pen
>> at the at the Mayhem tour, which is sort
of like a recurring theme. Uh she's got
a giant with quill pen and she is
slamming it around pretending to write
German and then she's walking back and
forth on on the very table in which she
was writing. Anyway, the opening like 15
minutes the opening act of the show I'm
seriously the best opening act of a pop
show I have ever seen. It is relentless.
>> Wow. Yes. Okay.
>> And at one point when she was we'll get
there but she start she does the early
part of the set does pull in a lot of
her old songs and you said to me she
figured out how to make this work now.
Yeah. Yeah, she figured out how to put
these songs into context here and I
started thinking about like, oh yeah,
that's very interesting because I never
really thought about the idea of like
sculpting an actual narrative out of
your songs like that and having them
having the old ones speak to the new
ones in a way that actually is organic.
>> The best sort of spectacle oriented
musicians, Madonna being among them,
>> figure out a way to incorporate the new
material with the old material and have
them all be of a piece. Beyonce, yes,
has figured that out. I feel like the
surprise of this show, I mean, I knew
she had that in her. The musicianship is
clear, but the the satisfaction of
hearing something like paparazzi be
reinvented as a funeral durge, right?
>> And it just deepens what already felt
like a creepy and deep song in a way.
Now, it means a completely different
thing to see her doing this. I mean, I'm
calling it a funeral durge because
that's the musical style that it it's
it's been rearranged into,
>> but I mean, it's kind of a wedding march
the way she does it. She comes out and
she takes this walk down the catwalk
with this huge wedding train behind her,
>> but don't forget the when she comes out,
she's on crutches. There's a lot of
lurching and limping and twitching in
this show. All the themes are coming
together.
>> Yes. Being looked at,
>> being watched. Yes. Like her interest in
in darkness. I mean, again, this is a
show about death. It is a show about
surviving death. It is a show about
being brought back from the dead. It is
a show about wrestling in death for more
life. It's a show about being killed,
being envied to death. There's a real
mortuary
sort of uh cemeterial dimension to this
show,
>> but also with a caveat which is very
Madonna, which is that dancing is the
thing that can be an antidote to death,
>> right?
>> Constantly coming back. Yes.
>> Yes. Like I mean she
>> I mean it's dance or die, isn't it?
>> I mean I was going to say literally the
song called Dance or Dies. Yeah. I just
I I love the the way she's thinking
about how the catalog can save her,
right?
>> The catalog is literally can.
>> It literally It truly can. But I mean,
so what what are the moments in this
show that really
>> stood out to you?
>> So she ends and she lands that first act
on Poker Face,
>> which she turns into sort of like a
danceoff between like her personas,
>> two personas, right? the old lady in red
and this like princess witch figure who
who needs to die like the the she has
killed this this woman in white
>> is that the plot
>> that I'm just we're just working it out
as we go Karen
>> cuz I'm picturing the second act or the
yeah when she's doing disease and she's
wrestling with it basically in a
gigantic litter box.
>> So you got all hot and bothered when
they wheeled out that giant dress. I got
hot. I didn't know I was gonna get hot
and bothered, but they wheeled out.
There's a second prop. Yeah.
>> That act two begins with. They wheel it
out. And I get one of my favorite songs
from this from this new album. It's
called Perfect Celebrity.
>> Yes.
>> And on stage, what I It's just You
called it a litter box. Shame on you,
Karen Gans. It is a It is a
>> sandbox. It's a All right, fine. It's a
sandbox. They have buried Lady Gaga in a
in a heap of sand.
>> I think the like what is so beautiful
about this moment is it is
simultaneously ridiculous but meant she
means it.
>> Don't forget what else is buried with
her in the litter box.
>> A full ass skeleton and some skulls.
There are humans attached to those
skulls.
>> Yes, human living humans. But Perfect
Celebrity is a song that sounds great on
its own, but given the context of this
sandbox and her commitment to sing like
this woman could die singing this song.
She could like it like like suffocate on
sand and she's just belting this song in
this sandbox. It is maybe the
performance of the night. There are many
many good performances in this show. But
I mean, you recall how the song ends.
She's basically fighting to the death
with the arm of the red character, which
is thrust out in the sand and choking
her.
>> This actually this was a feat of like
theatrical singing. I couldn't even
believe she was doing I mean like she's
literally being choked and fighting like
a physical struggle with this arm while
she's singing.
>> In the sandbox
are three Moonmen, which is the VMA
statue. She's got her artist of the year
statue in this sandbox with these skulls
and skeletons. I thought those moonmen
were just like digitally inserted.
>> Oh, no. I knew they were real. Also, I
believe they're moon people now.
>> Sorry.
>> But also, this is what I'm saying about
the camp.
>> Yeah.
>> Like she's doing this number that
probably worked just fine without the
moon people.
and she's fighting the skeleton and
trying to stay alive, but also
>> there's these three right over.
>> I love my moonmen. I love them. I love
the adoration. I love the respect.
>> Yeah.
>> And more camp when the number's over,
some trolly dancer comes out and
snatches one of the Moonmen and runs off
with it. It's just I don't know. I just
really this the humor the like the
earnestness the
>> well so that's the thing for me right
because to me like there's a lot of
humor in what she's doing like I
rewatched some of my videos from the
show and I literally was laughing out
loud like they are just ridiculous but
then I'm sometimes I ask myself is she
really in on the joke because I mean I
know that she is but so much of the act
and so much of the persona is this like
relentless sincerity particularly when
it comes to the fandom Mhm.
>> And in interviews too, like I've never
read an interview with Lady Gaga where
I've been like she's a real cutup,
>> you know, like she's very serious all
the time. And it's really interesting
because the the humor is in there. It is
in the music. It is ludicrous,
ridiculous, draggy, campy stuff.
>> But she seems to think that she has to
bring and maybe this is the the the
Jackson Maine Alley Star is born conceit
that's a construct over her whole
career. She kind of feels like she has
to be a serious artist sometimes. And
I'm like, I just want to see like the
whole picture. And I feel like this
show, I did see the whole picture. I'm
trying, you know, I'm putting the
threads together of why I thought it was
why it worked as well as it did.
>> This leaves to me the
the I want to talk about act four. Our
princess figure has basically they've I
guess she and the the princess the the
the dead princess and the the red queen
red crone have made amends. I guess
>> you know, I can't follow this. She sends
the white princess in a in a kind of
gondola down to the end of the stage.
And the songs that take her there are
these rearranged versions of A Million
Reasons and Shallow.
>> Yes.
>> And that's the song that transports her
to the end of the stage.
>> Yes.
>> Where a piano awaits.
and I didn't need to see her play piano.
But again, it's kind of like Beyonce at
the beginning of the Renaissance tour.
I'm like, I will just watch three hours
of this.
>> By the way, I do this really well. Yeah.
>> Yeah. I
when the piano comes out, I'm like, "Oh,
right. This is another mode of this
artist that she hasn't even bothered to
show. She could have just spent the
whole show doing this." Yeah.
>> But she she sits at this piano and she
does Edge of Glory.
>> Well, first she does
her biggest hit in the past few years.
>> Oh, Die with a Smile is the first song
she does and then she does Edge of
Glory.
>> Yeah.
>> Seeing her do this song by herself with
a piano on stage
>> transformative. This song is still in
the top 10 as we are speaking by the
way. Still after a year. I had a hard
time believing that it was as big as it
is.
>> And then what did you see?
>> And then I saw an arena full of people
freaking out and I was like, I have to
record this so I can actually prove I
saw it.
>> And that was the moment in the show
where I saw the most phones.
>> Yeah.
>> I mean, there were phones everywhere in
Madison Square Garden recording or
singing a song that's all already
downloaded. But to her credit, she made
it new. She made it mean something else.
>> It does sound like one one of her power
ballads when she's doing it. As though
it came from her pet. Yes.
>> As though as though it's all her.
>> Yeah. Just one other thing. Did you
notice this during the show? Like the
constant threatening to put your hands
up.
>> Oh, yes.
>> Like in a way that became menacing.
>> She was like, "Put your [__] hands
up." I mean, it was like whoa.
>> It's a little intense. Yeah.
>> Listen, put your [__] hands up, New
York City. That's a kind of power
>> Yeah. that she has. And I think that
what was so
fascinating about at least my experience
at that show was it was also a display
of
I don't want to say raw power, I want to
say refined power.
This was a person who understands their
relationship
to the people in the room,
>> but also their relationship to the
music, right? And like what the music
can be harnessed and repurposed for. Can
you talk to me a little about like what
Mayhem as a as a concertgoing experience
is doing in relation to
Lady Gaga writ large, right? Like what
is it what is it correcting? What is it
clarifying? What is it asking you to
forget?
>> Well, it is interesting what she left
out. I mean, for me it was clarifying
and just like it was I, as I said
earlier, you know, I've had like a sort
of roller coaster relationship with her
career, but I you know when you've seen
a true north star. I mean, like she's
the real deal and you just want her to
get back there. So, for me, it was
clarifying in that it is literally it's
not an era tour. I cannot stand the idea
that there's such a thing as an era tour
that you need to distinctly, you know,
>> separate parts of your career.
>> She was this like that was just some
costume changes.
>> I mean, that was it's a great tour,
>> but eras. No.
>> Yeah. No, no, no. But it's not that. No,
but what it does is it it it brings
together all the elements of the
theatricality and the humor and the over
the topness and then the understatedness
like all the different gagas were there.
You had your you had your
>> on a gondola singing shallow gaga. You
have your you know on the top of the
giant thing. There's also a giant skull
we didn't even talk about yet spins
around another incredible set piece.
This woman spends an entire act of the
show performing in a giant skull and the
giant sandbox. There's many things, but
for me it was clarifying into sort of
like a statement of artistic purpose.
Like the career is not over. We don't
even know where she is in it. I enjoyed
what you were saying about her ability
to see the future of her career that
there's many there are many iterations
of it of it to come.
>> But to be a pop superstar making an
arena spectacle, that's another thing we
didn't talk about arena versus stadium.
you know, you can control so much more
in an arena. It actually is intimate in
a way.
>> I wanted to ask you about this.
>> I because I get it now,
>> but and you know, as a New Yorker,
you're a New Yorker. You're a real New
Yorker. I was wondering about what it
meant that she was doing MSG.
>> Yeah.
>> Versus making us go all the way out to
Metife Stadium in New Jersey. you're
watching screens, you know, when you go
to a stadium show, no matter what. And
Beyonce perfected that and elevated it
and brought it someplace completely
different. Like the screen is the art.
>> But I really think that like a lot of
the Gaga stuff is intimate in a
different way. And you know, that's why
part of what I love and I' I talked
about this earlier too is like the power
ballads and and the more rock oriented
part of her catalog and particularly in
Born This Way, you know, at the end
where she she chooses to do like a piano
song and she ch and it's a quiet moment.
A moment like that might not be able to
hold the stadium the way that it holds
the arena.
>> And you know, so we saw the edge of
glory, which is one of my favorites, but
there's another song to me that is
crucial to that set.
>> And she played it my second night, which
was You and I.
>> Oh.
>> So You and I to me is like one of the
most clear showcases of the connection
between the Born This Way era and the
current moment
>> in terms of theatricality and the way
that power ballads have played a role in
her career.
>> Yes. Yes. Yes.
>> And I think we need to talk about the
2011 VMAs.
Okay.
>> Yes.
>> Have not thought about that since then
and I don't even really remember what
that is.
>> I I came prepared to talk about this
Wesley because it's important to me
because I felt it was a moment that
really was a turning point that
crystallized in her career about how far
she was willing to push and then how the
music could sort of bring it back.
>> Can we watch it? Can let's watch it.
>> We can.
>> Yeah. her.
>> Lady Gaga,
she left me.
>> She said it always starts out good and
then the guys, meaning me.
I'm one of the guys.
>> She was so famous that they asked her to
host the show that year. And she
>> came out in a character that she had
debuted in the video for her song You
and I. One of my faves, obviously. And
the character is called Joe Calderon as
sort of like her drag king Andrew Dice
Clay
uh persona. Joe Calderon is narrating a
conversation that he has had with Lady
Gaga.
>> I'm not real.
theater
and you and I
>> but then sits down snaps immediately
into
>> theatrical cabaret
>> rock ballad Gaga.
>> She takes off the jacket. It's like the
white t-shirt is already rolled up at
the sleeves. I mean, is there a pack of
cigarettes in there? There has to be
>> cuz she was smoke egg during the during
the bit.
>> Ladies and gentlemen,
>> from Queen who plays on the song arrives
and there they cut away to a reaction
shot and it is Dave Gro looking happier
than he has been the entire night. Trust
me,
>> he's like, "Oh, thank God. There's a
reason why I came to this thing." This
to me is the full encapsulation of the
entire Gaga project. And she figured it
out in 2011. This is a very long time
ago.
>> Yes. So, she's still at her peak of the
of what I consider the project, the fame
persona oriented project. What's real,
what's not. How far can I go with the
performance art aspect?
>> She's pushing the envelope at the VMAs.
We're not talking about a show known for
its like, you know, high art
aspirations.
>> Right. Right. Right.
>> This is exceptionally bold and I
actually can't even believe they let her
do this. I mean, this speaks to the
power of how of her stardom at that
moment that she went to the VMAs and
said, "I'm going to do a drag king
persona. We're going to perform one of
my more famous songs with Brian May. I'm
going to do choreography to it." And
this is just what I'm doing.
>> And you know what just occurred to me?
I'm an idiot. Like the tension here for
me is, and I'm not making a pun, but How
bad do you want me?
>> Which is a song on Mayhem. It's the song
that sounds most like a Taylor Swift.
It's the Taylor Swift song. And the
apotheiois of that tension for me is
applause.
>> Applause. Applause.
Applause. Applause. Applause.
>> I'm here for the applause.
>> Yeah.
>> I'm here for the applause. Applause.
>> Here for the applause. Applause.
>> Way that you scream and cheer for me.
I'm here for the applause. The applause.
The applause.
Give me the thing that I love.
>> Yeah. I'm enjoying this dramatic reading
of applause.
>> I mean, put your hands and make them
touch. And that's the last song on art
pop, which is telling to me. Then we'll
get to the second verse of that song,
which to me is just the deepest [__]
Are you referring to the Coons line? How
did you know?
>> I'm going to cry. I covering the roll
out of this album in real time. I was at
Rolling Stone. She did an event at the
Brooklyn Navyyard with a giant coons. Do
you remember this? No.
>> And the album was coming out that night
at midnight. I needed to be at home to
review it. So I could
>> I was living in Boston when this album
came out. I was still in Boston.
>> This when you're a music journalist, you
really just remember the pain of
covering everything. Frank Ocean when he
was building a staircase. Do you
remember this on a video?
>> I remember that.
>> And I watched him build a staircase for
like seven hours. I was like, I'm going
to kill himself. anticipation of blonde.
>> Yes.
>> Anyway, but get to the second verse of
the song.
>> Well, I mean the second verse like
includes the line um one minute I'm the
Coons fan.
Suddenly the Coons is me.
>> Yes.
>> I think it took me three three
experiences with that song to hear what
the lyric even was, but then I was like,
you know what? Here we go. Yeah,
>> this is my new favorite person until
until it doesn't last anymore. But here
here's the whole project right here.
>> Yeah.
>> In this whole song, but also in this one
line. And it like she could have picked
anybody, Karen. She could, you know, one
minute I'm I'm the Warhol fan, suddenly
the Warhol's me. Um, one minute I'm the
Picasso fan, suddenly the Picasso's me.
It had to be Coons.
>> She picks Jeff Coons. Yeah.
>> The guy who makes like ceramic Michael
Jackson and Bubbles statues at Lifesize
>> and giant dogs.
>> The giant metal balloon dogs, right? The
thinginess of pop artist, right? Like
the objectiest of the pop artist. The
labor, right? The weight, the deceptive
weight of a [__] right? like the the
elucory
weight and heft of a of a metal balloon.
It just looks like you could just pick
it up and like walk out of the walk out
of mama with it, but oh no, it weighs
three tons.
>> Applause like on its own terms is just I
mean to me it's top five gaga.
>> Yep.
>> But there's also a like a real
understanding of how this is going to
go. And you know the idea that what art
pop is also doing is crystallizing that
moment where you transition from being a
girl with a dream to a person where the
dream is a problem or the dream has some
costs. Yeah.
>> But applause to me is like
I'm just going to tell you where I am
>> and y'all ain't going to believe me cuz
y'all think this is an act. Y'all don't
know what I have tricked you so
thoroughly into not being able to tell
the difference between me and Joe
Calderon
that I'm going to give you a song that
is just telling you what I want and you
won't even think I mean it. That's who
she wants to be. That's who she thinks
she's been turned into. Suddenly the
Coons is me.
>> But what happens after this album cycle?
>> Well, that's when she ages into Tony
Bennett, right?
>> Because she pushed it. I mean, it's
great. Art pop is it's a it's a
beautiful disaster to me. I mean, it's a
it's hilarious.
>> Your review captures what a beautiful
disaster it is.
>> There's one line in that review that I
actually am proud of where I said that
it was like it was art directed by
RuPaul, Dr. Ruth, and Beus and Butad.
>> Every now and then I got I got a zinger.
That was one of my favorite lines I've
ever written. It's very true. Um, but
there so the audience though there's
sort of like a little bit of a reaction
and then she reacts to the reaction
>> and I was curious to talk to you about
her fans and the reaction to the
reaction and the way that she has
navigated the fandom over the years
because you know she is mother monster.
>> Yes.
>> Keep in mind that Gaga arrived like a
young person, right? But she was still
mother,
>> right? Even as an exceptionally young
person, a lot of that I think she was,
you know, she does a fair amount of
borrowing and homage to the queer
community. Obviously mother is a very
common
>> Yeah. trope and drag houses and you know
and just searching for mothers. I don't
want to take us too far off course off
course.
>> This is on course ma'am keep going.
>> There's one I saw Madonna's last tour
seven times because I was worried it
might be the last time in the arena I
had to do it. There was a moment she was
describing during the AIDS crisis when
she was visiting a patient in the
hospital
>> and that no one wanted to visit these
people and you know she really was on
the front lines with the queer community
very early and that she crawled into bed
with this young man and he grabbed her
hand and he said mother thank you for
coming. I actually cried in MSG when she
was telling the story. I was just
thinking about the relationship of
fandoms to the motherhood of it all.
Gaga has really without even perhaps she
never probably knew that story, but she
has taken her fandom, you know, by the
hand that way. She just speaks so
directly to them about caring about
their needs. She knows that it's a huge
queer fandom and she dedicates large
swaths of the show to it and stuff. Did
you feel all that? I mean, I felt it
during the show, but even if when it
wasn't as explicit because in the past,
she's done a lot more speechifying.
>> Yes.
I think the power of that night was just
how she didn't need to say anything.
>> You know, she does born this way and
there's like part of the camp for me was
the way she does it, right? She's like,
"Let me talk to my queer community.
You guys are special.
You guys are one of a kind. You're
wonderful people." But you already know
that. But I'm gonna tell you anyway.
>> And then she starts singing Born This
Way.
>> It's a very fun black brassy version of
that song. To me it really felt
celebratory. Like in the past I had been
a little eye rolly about Born This Way.
I find the lyrics exceptionally cringey.
I do feel like it sounds like express
yourself and Madonna did play a mashup
of the two songs on tour and it was
hilarious. See that's hilarity and high
camp. But I don't know. I just let
myself let go and become part of the
crowd for that moment. Especially during
the second show I saw her and I was like
I was touched.
>> It's well part of it is, you know, I
mean I I feel like this iteration of
Lady Gaga sort of makes sense for the
time that we're in. this like awareness
of death, the like
uh insistence that that that it is
around us, the awareness that it is
around us
>> that the stakes seem exceptionally high.
>> I mean, on the one hand, you know, haha,
she's performing an entire act of the
show on a giant skull. I mean, for real,
haha. But also, holy [__] But I think
that like this mother business,
this this this
awareness that there are real harms
being done.
I found her trust in understanding what
we had all gathered to experience
to be
enough and did not need further comment.
>> Yes. And well, I think actually what you
just said was so interesting to me
because this is the most disciplined
>> she has ever been. This is the most
practiced and precise and crisp the show
has ever been. And it's for the Torah
called Mayhem.
>> It's so ironic that she has actually
found her order in what would ostensibly
be one of the more chaotic periods of
her career. But I think that she's
giving us the controlled chaos is
letting us like when I go to a show like
that. I kept telling people they're
like, "You're going again. I don't think
I'm going again. I need the serotonin."
Like I legitimately need it. I really
feel something in that room.
>> I Yes. I think the thing that makes her
this iteration of her perfect for now is
that like we also have a really
disturbing
I don't know if it's disturbing, but
we're comfortable with grimness,
>> with the cataclysmic
with with imminent danger. It's
meaningful to me that a song like called
Die with a Smile, it is a song that
easily translates to a relationship
between a fan and a fandom.
>> Mhm.
I think that that that her conception of
herself to the degree that she has
conceived of herself as mother
feels I felt the thing that the thing
that you felt is the thing that I felt
in that room
which is that she was here to protect
she was here for these two and a half
hours to say you're going to here
>> you're fine
>> I'm not going to beat you over the head
with how wonderful you queer people are.
Y'all know I am going to tell you anyway
with one song though. But it was more
the feeling of good will and safety and
comfort in a show that was in no way
comfortable. But there's also something
really
I understood that this is a person and
this is part of the safety, right? This
is part of the the the the mother
aspect. I felt like this is a person who
would who would die on that stage for
us.
>> Yeah.
>> Like
because she
she wants it that much, right?
>> I think she wants to give that much.
>> Yeah. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. I
think she's she's the pop star of of
everybody. Just like name the the 12
most elite pop stars we have.
She's the one who has the fire that will
burn you, right? It is both a beacon
and infernal in some way.
>> I mean, I think Madonna shares the
flame.
>> She's not one of the 12 people. I mean,
like like current pop stars, right?
Okay. You're taking her of this
generation of like 45 and under, right?
>> I don't think Beyonce would die for us.
>> No.
>> No. She She knows better. Yeah.
>> Gaga,
>> she has she has the guardrails,
>> right?
>> Yeah.
>> I just feel Taylor Swift wouldn't die
for for these people. For us. She
wouldn't die for us.
>> No,
>> she's about to She's about to get a
divorce is what was what's happening.
>> Yeah, we haven't gotten there yet.
>> Not from Travis Kelsey, but from the
fans.
>> 100%. A change is a coming in that
relationship.
>> So, you don't feel that Gaga is beholden
to the fandom in any way, despite all
the language about
>> No. No. Beholden? No,
devoted. There's a shamelessness.
>> Yes.
>> You know, the showmanship is really
about her saying, "I'm yours."
>> What's So, when you said shamelessness,
it's just not that that's a bad thing.
It just triggered for me the end of the
show where she comes out makeup free.
>> Yes. I'm packing up.
>> You fear the show might be over.
>> I'm packing up. And Karen's like,
>> "No,
>> go on."
>> Well, she hasn't done the Taylor Swift
song yet, I think, is probably what I
said. And she she is barefaced just in a
t-shirt and she starts doing How bad do
you want me? And she does the thing that
sometimes pop stars do which is like the
peak behind the scenes, right? This is
my makeup chair. These are my dressers.
These are my dancers. We're under the
stage. And she comes up from under the
stage onto the stage to the Taylor Swift
song as naked as she has been all night.
>> Mhm. Just just boots, tights, the shirt
and the sock on her head
>> to sing How Bad Do You Want Me?
>> That's amazing. It really is amazing
because she could have ended on the high
of bad romance,
>> but Karen, for her to come out and
essentially just stay on stage as
her undecorated self is what I would is
I guess the way to put it.
>> Her at her most raw and just like be
having a ball. She is having so much fun
at the end of this show.
>> She is. And she's not doing
choreography. She's just kind of
dancing.
just dancing
>> and she looks so happy.
>> Yeah, but I mean also you think about
it. She arrives at top this massive
dress cake corset thing, the most high
camp
possibly can imagine somebody being and
she ends it essentially as naked as she
could possibly be. She's taken you on
the whole journey of her whole thing and
it really does come together. M. No, I
mean I think that, you know, this is
really a show about about death and
dying, but also about
what it means to be alive in the middle
of all that death and despair. And just
the idea of her walking up and down that
catwalk just dancing and clapping and
singing some more like not knowing when
to end her own show.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. There's always like five false
goodbyes. You're like, "Well, she's on
her knees. That must be it." Nope. She's
back up.
>> Even when we do,
>> I didn't want this tour to end. I went
three times. Leslie
>> Karen Gans, thank you. We gaga.
>> It was great.
>> We did.
>> Thank you for doing this. I really
appreciate it.
>> Thank you. I was going to make a pun,
but
>> make it. Make it.
>> I was like, we we've already done The
Edge of Glory. I'm like, is there
another one? What am I missing? Um,
we've reached the edge of glory.
>> We approached and then surpassed the
edge of glory. Oh,
>> hanging on a moment with you.
>> The edge. The edge. The edge. The edge.
The edge. The edge. The edge.
You got to finish it. It's like a thing.